most used conditions command (#1)
isfett/php-analyzer: docs/MostUsedConditions.md

# Most Used Conditions

> This command is inspired by Kent Beck's Medium-Articel [Conditions Are Power-Law Distributed: An Example](https://medium.com/@kentbeck_7670/conditions-are-power-law-distributed-an-example-61fa4e0d3500).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command is inspired by Kent Beck's Medium-Article [Conditions Are Power-Law Distributed: An Example](https://medium.com/@kentbeck_7670/conditions-are-power-law-distributed-an-example-61fa4e0d3500).
```

## Story
I wanted to inspect the conditions in our project, checking for magic numbers and magic strings, maybe inconsistency of equal (`==`) and identical (`===`) and different types (for example `!$user` instead of `null === $user`).
 
By trying to get all `if`, `elseif` and `else if` conditions in different projects my command ended up like `grep -R --include='*.php' --exclude-dir=vendor --exclude-dir=.idea 'if' . | perl -nle 'print $2 if /. (else)*?\s?if\s?\((.*)\)(.*){/,' | sort | uniq -c | sort -rn | sed --expression="s/ [0-9]\+ /&;/g" > ~/conditions.csv`. I realized that just looking for if's and elseif's is not everything I'm interested in, so I wrote an PHP-Implementation which gives you much more control. You can also check ternaries, null-coalesce and bool-returning functions.

> By writing this command I found out that I don't only want to check the original conditions on some time. I wanted to know each part in an isset itself, later I wanted to split conditions by `&&` and `||`. While adding more and more post-processors and checking the conditions I decided to remove some parts, like casts or assignments. And here we are now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While writing this command I found out that I did not only want to check the original conditions, but I wanted to know each part of an isset itself. Later I wanted to split conditions by `&&` and `||`. While adding more and more post-processors and checking the conditions I decided to remove some parts, like casts or assignments. And here we are now.
```

<img src="./images/MostUsedConditions/demo.gif">

### With this command you can:
- Declare which directory (recursive) you want to inspect
- Change the suffixes (default is just *.php)
- Exclude dirs/files/patterns
- Whitelist patterns (if you just want to check one/some file/s)
- Declare which conditions are interesting (like: only If or If and ElseIf, just ElseIf, just Ternary or Coalesce, see [Visitors](#visitors))
- Post-process conditions (like split isset or by logical operators, remove assignments, see [Processors](#processors))
- Activate Flip-Checking (maybe you want to check which conditions are not well written in yoda)
- Exclude conditions with less than n occurrences
- generate a csv (to plot graphs in [Excel](#create-a-log10-graph-in-excel) or gplot)

### Syntax
```shell script
# cloned repository, maybe via composer global require
bin/php-analyzer most-used-conditions [--options] directory

# phar
php-analyzer.phar most-used-conditions [--options] directory
```

> If you miss directory it will use the current working directory. You can use absolute or relative paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you omit the directory it will use the current working directory. You can use absolute or relative paths.
```

- `--sort` for sorting-direction by the number of occurrences in the source code. Default is `asc`, change to desc with `--sort=desc`
- `--max-entries` for just showing the highest n entries. Default none, show all conditions. To just show the five highest `--max-entries=5`
- `--max-occurrences` for limiting the number of occurrences per condition. Default none, show all occurrences (relative filename + line number). If you just want to see "some" add `--max-occurrences=5`
- `--min-occurrences` for limiting the number of conditions and just show conditions with more occurrences in source-code than treshold. For example `--min-occurrences=5` just will ignore all conditions with four or less times in your source code
- `--with-flip-check` enables flip check, see [Flip-Check](#flip-check)
- `--without-occurrences` will hide all occurrences of the conditions and just print the table without any
- `--without-flags` will hide the "flags" like `flipped` when `--with-flip-check` is enabled
- `--without-affected-by-processor` will hide the information which processors post-processed a conditions

> - `--with-csv` will export the result table to a csv (comma-separated). Add a filepath as value (absolute or relative) and make sure you have write rights with the current user. Example `--with-csv=output.csv` will create a output.csv file in the current working directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--with-csv` will export the result table to a csv (comma-separated). Add a filepath as value (absolute or relative) and make sure you have writing permission with the current user. Example `--with-csv=output.csv` will create a output.csv file in the current working directory
```

- `--csv-delimiter-semicolon` will change the delimiter from the csv to semicolon (;)

### Visitors
For example we have some code like [this](examples/MostUsedConditions/visitors.php):
```php
<?php
if(date('Y') === 2019) {
    echo '2019!!!';
} elseif (date('Y') === 2018) {
    echo '2018!!!';
} elseif (date('Y') === 2017) {
    echo '2017!!!';
}

if(   date("Y") === 2019) {
    // do something
}

$page = isset($_GET['page']) ? $_GET['page'] : 1;

$page = $_GET['page'] ?? 1;

function isAnonymous(?User $user): bool
{
    return null === $user;
}
```
The following visitors are available:
- `If`: Will add all conditions inside if-statements, here it will just add `date('Y') === 2019` twice
- `ElseIf`: Will add all conditions inside elseif-statements, here it will add `date('Y') === 2018` and <br/>`date('Y') === 2017`
- `Ternary`: This visitor will add all conditions on the left side of a ternary, here it will add `isset($_GET['page'])`
- `Coalesce`: Like Ternary, left side will be added, here `$_GET['page']`
- `BooleanReturn`: (experimental) Will add the return statements without `return` in methods that have :bool as return type (not docblock), here `null === $user`

> **Important:** This tool uses a php-parser, and ignore different code-styles. So it's no matter if you are using single-quotes or double-quotes, add different types or amount of whitespaces and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Important:** This tool uses a php-parser, and ignores different code-styles. So it doesn't matter if you are using single-quotes or double-quotes, add different types or amount of whitespaces and so on.
```

You can combine visitors, use all or just one with a comma-separated list, like `--visitors=If,ElseIf,Ternary` or `--visitors=Coalesce`.

> If you mistype a name of a visitor, you will raise an Exception including all possible names (case-sensitive).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you mistype the name of a visitor, you will raise an Exception including all possible names (case-sensitive).
```

<img src="./images/MostUsedConditions/visitorexception.png">

### Processors

> You can combine processors, just add them to a comma-seperated list, like <br>`--processors=SplitIsset,SplitLogicalOperator`. The order of processors is important, in the current case it will start with the SplitIsset and then the SplitLogicalOperator. Maybe your results will change if you change the order of the processors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can combine processors. Just add them to a comma-seperated list, like <br>`--processors=SplitIsset,SplitLogicalOperator`. The order of processors is important. In the current case it will start with the SplitIsset and then the SplitLogicalOperator. Your results might change if you change the order of the processors.
```

You also can use none of the processors (default).

> If you mistype a name of a processor, you will raise an Exception including all possible names (case-sensitive).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you mistype the name of a processor, you will raise an Exception including all possible names (case-sensitive).
```

`php bin/php-analyzer most-used-conditions --without-affected-by-processors --visitors=If --processors=NegateBooleanNot --include-files=negatebooleannotprocessor.php`

<img src="./images/MostUsedConditions/negatebooleannotprocessor.png" height="240">

#### RemoveAssignment
This processor will remove assignments in your conditions. See [this](examples/MostUsedConditions/removeassignmentprocessor.php) source-code:
```php
<?php
if ($this->getUser()) {
    // do something
}

if ($user = $this->getUser()) {
    // do something else
}
```
You want to know that the condition from $this->getUser() is used twice, but normally it would be counted as one plus one. This processor will remove `$user = ` from the second condition and will count 2 for `$this->getUser()`.

`php bin/php-analyzer most-used-conditions --without-affected-by-processors --visitors=If --processors=RemoveAssignment --include-files=removeassignmentprocessor.php`

<img src="./images/MostUsedConditions/removeassignmentprocessor.png" height="200">

#### RemoveDuplicateBooleanNot

> This processor removes duplicate negations. So if you have an complex condition, and split it off, it could be possible in the printed condition is something like `!!$user`. You can achieve this with [this](examples/MostUsedConditions/removeduplicatebooleannotprocessor.php) source-code and the processors [SplitLogicalOperator](#splitlogicaloperator) and [NegateBooleanNot](#negatebooleannot) together:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This processor removes duplicate negations. So if you have a complex condition, and split it off, it could be possible for the printed condition to be something like `!!$user`. You can achieve this with [this](examples/MostUsedConditions/removeduplicatebooleannotprocessor.php) source-code and the processors [SplitLogicalOperator](#splitlogicaloperator) and [NegateBooleanNot](#negatebooleannot) together:
```

```php
<?php
$user = null;
if (!(30 === date('d') && !(null === $user))) {
    // do something
}
```
If you add the RemoveDuplicateBooleanNot-Processor, it will print `null === $user` and removes the `!!`.

`php bin/php-analyzer most-used-conditions --without-affected-by-processors --visitors=If --processors=SplitLogicalOperator,RemoveDuplicateBooleanNot --include-files=removeduplicatebooleannotprocessor.php`

#### RemoveSingleFullyQualifiedName

> This processor will ignore backslashes from fully qualified name functions or class name (e.g. new \DateTime), because maybe you don't use them or import an class. Codestyle can change often. See [this](examples/MostUsedConditions/removesinglefullyqualifiednameprocessor.php) source-code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This processor will ignore backslashes from fully qualified name functions or class names (e.g. new \DateTime), because maybe you don't use them or import a class. Codestyle can change often. See [this](examples/MostUsedConditions/removesinglefullyqualifiednameprocessor.php) source-code:
```

```php
<?php
if (strtolower('Chris') === 'chris') {
    // hey chris
}

if (\strtolower('Chris') === 'chris') {
    // chris again :o
}
```
The RemoveSingleFullyQualifiedName-Processor will count the condition as 2, without the processor it will count both as single condition.

`php bin/php-analyzer most-used-conditions --without-affected-by-processors --visitors=If --processors=RemoveSingleFullyQualifiedName --include-files=removesinglefullyqualifiednameprocessor.php`

<img src="./images/MostUsedConditions/removesinglefullyqualifiednameprocessor.png" height="140">

#### RemoveCast
This processor will any (cast)-casts (like `(int)`). I saw this in some legacy applications. See [this](examples/MostUsedConditions/removecastprocessor.php) source-code:
```php
<?php

$someReturnValue = '123';
if ((int) $foo === 123) {
    // found numeric 123
}
```
The RemoveCast-Processor will count the condition as 1, but without (int).

`php bin/php-analyzer most-used-conditions --without-affected-by-processors --visitors=If --processors=RemoveCast --include-files=removecastprocessor.php`

<img src="./images/MostUsedConditions/removecastprocessor.png" height="140">

### Flip-Check

> - with `--with-flip-check` the command will try to swap both sides of `==`, `!=`, `===` and `!==` and check if it already exists. If yes it will mark it with an `flipped`-flag. See [this](examples/MostUsedConditions/flipcheck.php) source-code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- with `--with-flip-check` the command will try to swap both sides of `==`, `!=`, `===` and `!==` and check if it already exists. If yes it will mark it with a `flipped`-flag. See [this](examples/MostUsedConditions/flipcheck.php) source-code:
```

```php
<?php
if(date('Y') === 2019) {
    echo '2019!!!';
}

if (2019 === date('Y')) {
    echo '2019!!!';
}
```

> Normally the command will count both conditions as found once, with the option `--with-flip-check` it will be count as twice and flip the second condition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Normally the command will count both conditions as found once, with the option `--with-flip-check` it will be counted twice and flip the second condition.
```
